ASUS ROG Flow Z13 + GPD Thunderbolt 5 eGPU + RTX 4090: working CUDA, external display and reconnect on CachyOS

  I wanted to share what finally got my eGPU working, because this turned into quite a troubleshooting session.

  The short version: the working combination on my machine is NVIDIA’s proprietary 615.71.09 kernel modules, with GSP disabled, NVIDIA runtime power management disabled, and the USB4 root ports plus the GPU/
  audio functions kept out of runtime suspend.

  CUDA and external display output now work. The eGPU loads automatically at boot or when connected, and I have a KDE tray action for safely disconnecting it. Reconnecting after that brings it back
  automatically.

  There are still two caveats: surprise unplugging is unsafe, and I’ve had an intermittent hang while rebooting with the eGPU active. More on those below.

  ## My setup

  - Laptop: ASUS ROG Flow Z13 GZ302EA
  - Platform: AMD Strix Halo, integrated Radeon graphics
  - BIOS: GZ302EA.314
  - Enclosure: GPD TBT5-EGPU
  - Thunderbolt bridge: Intel JHL9480, PCI ID 8086:5786
  - GPU: ASUS RTX 4090, AD102/Ada, PCI ID 10de:2684
  - Desktop: KDE Plasma / KWin Wayland
  - Working kernels:
      - Stock Arch 7.2.4-arch1-2
      - CachyOS 7.2.5-1-cachyos

  - Working NVIDIA driver/userspace: 615.71.09

  Earlier compute tests also passed on CachyOS 7.2.4-1-cachyos.

  The internal display stays on AMD. NVIDIA drives the external monitor when one is connected and handles CUDA workloads independently.

  One important distinction: this is an RTX 4090/Ada setup, not Blackwell.

  ## Where we started

  The initial direction came from this project:

  https://github.com/djanice1980/eGPU-Blackwell-Stability

  Its findings for the same laptop/platform and JHL9480 bridge were particularly relevant:

  1. BIOS 314 improved the platform behavior.
  2. NVreg_DynamicPowerManagement=0 had to actually take effect.
  3. Both USB4 PCIe tunnel root ports needed to stay awake.

  That was a useful starting point, but those settings alone didn’t resolve every problem on my machine.

  My BIOS was already 314, so I can’t personally quantify the improvement from the BIOS update. It was part of the baseline for these tests.

  ## The biggest problem: hard resets during NVIDIA initialization

  Initially, plugging in the eGPU—or booting with it connected—could crash and reboot the laptop.

  We eventually separated basic PCIe enumeration from NVIDIA initialization. With NVIDIA loading blocked, the GPU and its JHL9480 parent bridge could enumerate and remain readable during a 60-second
  observation.

  Loading or initializing the NVIDIA driver was where some trials fell over.

  After the hard resets, the next boot recorded:

  x86/amd: Previous system reset reason [0x08000800]:
  an uncorrected error caused a data fabric sync flood event

  In one trial, the last recorded operation was:

  nvidia-smi -L

  In other trials, it was insertion of the NVIDIA core module.

  Those checkpoints tell us where the machine stopped responding. They don’t identify the underlying defect by themselves.

  We tried the stock open driver and later patched open-module builds. Patched 615 trials still hard-reset on both the Arch and CachyOS kernels. Simply changing kernels wasn’t the fix.

  ## What finally worked: proprietary NVIDIA with GSP off

  The breakthrough was using NVIDIA’s unpatched proprietary 615.71.09 modules, built for the exact kernel being tested, with:

  NVreg_DynamicPowerManagement=0
  NVreg_EnableGpuFirmware=0

  That combination successfully initialized the GPU and survived NVML, CUDA and display testing.

  To be clear, we didn’t write a replacement NVIDIA driver. The successful modules came from NVIDIA’s proprietary kernel/ source tree, rather than kernel-open/. The custom code is the loading, validation,
  power-policy and connect/disconnect integration.

  Also, I don’t want to oversell the diagnosis: this wasn’t a perfectly controlled test of GSP alone. Module flavor, firmware path and patch status changed between some attempts. Proprietary + GSP off is the
  combination that worked here; that doesn’t prove GSP alone caused every earlier crash.

  These settings are not instructions to disable GSP on the open modules. The successful configuration specifically uses the proprietary driver.

  ## Making sure DPM really was disabled

  One easy trap was assuming that writing a modprobe option meant it had won.

  A distro modprobe file can supply another value later in the configuration order. We used a late-sorting override:

  /etc/modprobe.d/zz-nvidia-egpu.conf

  Containing:

  options nvidia NVreg_DynamicPowerManagement=0

  But the authoritative check was the loaded driver’s actual state:

  cat /proc/driver/nvidia/params

  The working configuration reported:

  DynamicPowerManagement: 0
  EnableGpuFirmware: 0

  The guarded loader also explicitly supplied both options when loading the proprietary core module.

  nvidia-smi -q reported:

  GSP Firmware Version: N/A

  We also hit an overly strict test that insisted on a particular “Runtime D3” status string. That was a validation-script assumption, not proof that the DPM override had failed. The live parameters and actual
  behavior mattered more than matching one diagnostic string.

  ## Keeping the USB4 tunnel and GPU awake

  Both laptop USB4 tunnel root ports are pinned to:

  power/control = on

  The root ports are:

  0000:00:01.1
  0000:00:01.2

  The NVIDIA display function and its HDA audio function also need that policy.

  The audio function caught us out: the GPU could be on while its audio function was still auto. We added handling for the relevant add/bind events and verified the final state after driver binding.

  The persistent udev rule is:

  /etc/udev/rules.d/99-usb4-tunnel-ports-awake.rules

  The NVIDIA matches use vendor/class information rather than a fixed PCI address.

  That matters because the GPU appeared through different ports as:

  0000:03:00.0

  or:

  0000:63:00.0

  The loader discovers the GPU and immediate parent bridge dynamically.

  Another correction: the USB4 udev rule does not have to be embedded in the initramfs. The reference implementation applies it during normal udev coldplug. An unused root port may have accumulated some
  suspended time before the rule ran; that alone isn’t a failure if its final policy is on.

  ## Checking the tunnel before initializing NVIDIA

  The guarded tests read PCI configuration space for the GPU and its JHL9480 parent before touching NVIDIA initialization.

  The hard-stop conditions included:

  - Configuration space reading as all ff
  - Invalid or inaccessible configuration data
  - Header type 7f

  If the bridge or GPU was already inaccessible, the test stopped and saved diagnostics. It did not try to revive the device with rescans, resets or repeated driver loading.

  That distinction was useful: “the GPU isn’t enumerated yet,” “the tunnel is dead,” and “NVIDIA initialization failed” are different situations.

  ## CUDA results

  With proprietary 615, GSP off, DPM0 and the power pins in place:

  - nvidia-smi worked.
  - A tiny CUDA kernel ran and returned 256 verified results.
  - PCI configuration remained readable after the test.
  - NVML still worked after a 60-second idle period.

  On Arch 7.2.4 and the earlier CachyOS 7.2.4, a larger bounded test also passed: 60 rounds using 64-MiB transfers and kernel launches, followed by another idle check.

  On CachyOS 7.2.5, the tiny CUDA test and display/idle checks passed. I’m keeping that separate from the older bounded test rather than claiming every workload was repeated on every kernel.

  These are functional checks, not a claim that long gaming sessions or large model workloads have been fully stress-tested.

  An external monitor isn’t required for CUDA, either. The 4090 can do the computation while the AMD GPU handles the laptop screen.

  ## Getting external video output working

  Once the compute path was working, we loaded the matching proprietary display modules:

  nvidia-modeset.ko
  nvidia-drm.ko

  The tested DRM settings were:

  modeset=1
  fbdev=0

  External HDMI output then worked, including 3840×1600, while the internal AMD display remained available.

  Each kernel has its own matching module build. An Arch module isn’t interchangeable with a CachyOS module just because both report NVIDIA 615.71.09.

  The working deployment keeps these private builds under /opt/gpd-egpu/ and loads them through guarded helpers. It doesn’t overwrite stock kernel modules or rely on loading whichever NVIDIA module happens to
  be found first.

  ## Automatic connection and startup

  The initial tests were deliberately manual. Once they passed, we added a systemd/udev integration for:

  - Booting with the enclosure connected
  - Connecting it after login
  - Restarting the driver after a recorded safe disconnect

  The helper checks the running kernel, module identities, live parameters, PCI readability and power policy.

  There’s also a failure marker to prevent an interrupted initialization from turning into an automatic retry loop.

  Early versions still contained the diagnostic 60-second waits, which made startup unnecessarily slow. Those waits were removed from normal activation after testing; the immediate checks stayed.

  Automatic startup and connection now work on both supported kernels.

  ## Disconnecting was a separate problem

  This was the part where “the GPU works” definitely did not mean “everything works.”

  Pulling the USB4 cable while NVIDIA’s display stack was active froze the desktop and required a forced shutdown.

  The working planned-disconnect sequence is:

  1. Check which processes hold NVIDIA/DRM device handles.
  2. Refuse to proceed if ordinary GPU applications are still using it.
  3. Temporarily stop LACT if it holds the GPU.
  4. Send a synthetic removal notification for the NVIDIA DRM nodes so desktop clients release them.
  5. Wait for those handles to close.
  6. Normally unload:
      - nvidia_drm
      - nvidia_modeset
      - nvidia_uvm
      - nvidia

  7. Only then report READY TO UNPLUG.

  The synthetic notification is not a PCI remove, reset or rescan. The hardware stays connected while the desktop releases it.

  There’s no forced module unload. If clients or module references remain, it stops and tells me to keep the cable connected.

  This is exposed through a KDE tray icon with a left-click menu. Authorization is scoped to the specific disconnect helper, so it doesn’t ask for my sudo password every time.

  After a clean eject and physical disconnect, the internal desktop stays usable. Reconnecting automatically brings the eGPU and external display back. That cycle has worked on both Arch and CachyOS 7.2.5.

  ## The LACT wrinkle

  LACT needs to release the GPU before unloading NVIDIA, so the eject helper may stop lactd.service.

  Originally, reconnect left LACT paused. Opening the GUI then showed:

  Service Status: inactive
  Connection Status: not connected

  It could still show both GPUs because it was running in standalone monitoring mode. “Not connected” referred to the LACT daemon, not the eGPU.

  A follow-up change has been prepared to restart LACT only after successful reconnect and only if that same eject cycle recorded that our helper stopped it.

  That change has passed unit tests, but I haven’t confirmed its live lifecycle testing yet, so I’m not listing it as fully validated.

  ## There is still an intermittent reboot hang

  I’ve had several successful reboots, but one reboot after multiple disconnect/reconnect cycles hung.

  The logs showed:

  System is rebooting
  PCIe Link Down
  NVRM: Xid 79: GPU has fallen off the bus

  That was followed by DRM framebuffer-cleanup warnings and repeated:

  nvidia-modeset: ERROR: GPU:0:
  Error while waiting for GPU progress

  Plasma components then timed out while stopping.

  The GPU link went down roughly 1.4 seconds after reboot began. Earlier eject cycles had also produced flip-event timeout warnings even though reconnect subsequently worked.

  So this is still an unresolved display/device-teardown issue. The logs don’t establish why the link dropped, whether physical cable movement was involved, or whether repeated cycles caused it.

  For now, my precaution is to safe-eject, wait for READY TO UNPLUG, physically disconnect, and then reboot.

  ## A few failures were our own scripts, not the hardware

  Worth mentioning these because otherwise the troubleshooting story makes the platform look worse than the evidence supports:

  - A broad nvidia*.ko* check falsely flagged the stock kernel’s legitimate nvidia-wmi-ec-backlight module.
  - Requiring the GPU to enumerate before applying the root-port power fix created a circular dependency.
  - Requiring the USB4 udev rule inside the initramfs was unnecessary.
  - A CUDA child script initially rejected its new trial-directory path before running any CUDA work.
  - A loader check unnecessarily tied Arch activation to the installed CachyOS kernel version.
  - An archive operation failed because /var/lib and /root were on different filesystems.

  Those were corrected conservatively rather than “fixed” by deleting stock modules or weakening every check.

  We also had a separate Limine boot-image checksum mismatch during the earlier work. That was repaired by correcting the relevant checksum fields after measuring the actual files. Later updates explicitly
  verified boot-image checksums and preserved a recovery snapshot and boot backup.

  ## What I’d take away from this

  For this GZ302EA + JHL9480 + RTX 4090 combination, the practical working recipe is:

  - BIOS 314
  - Exact-kernel proprietary NVIDIA 615.71.09
  - NVreg_EnableGpuFirmware=0
  - Genuine live DynamicPowerManagement: 0
  - Both USB4 root ports pinned awake
  - NVIDIA display and HDA functions pinned awake
  - Matching UVM/modeset/DRM modules
  - Controlled driver loading
  - Proper client release and normal driver unload before unplugging

  We did not need blanket pcie_aspm=off, forced PCIe link speeds, PCI rescan loops or Thunderbolt controller rebinding for the successful setup.

  CUDA, video output, automatic connection and tray-assisted disconnect/reconnect are working. Seamless surprise unplug and completely reliable shutdown with the active eGPU are not solved.

  I’ve put together a sharing folder with the helper/tray source, build instructions, module hashes, validation notes and rollback information. The public source archive excludes machine-specific driver
  binaries and raw private logs. It’s a reference implementation for adapting carefully—not a universal “run this as root” installer.

  Credit to the eGPU-Blackwell-Stability project for the platform power-management direction, and to everyone documenting these USB4/eGPU issues. Hopefully this gives the next person with a Flow Z13 and a 4090
  a much shorter route to a usable setup.
